Doc: 2.1.3 release notes (#1343)
canonical/microcloud: doc/reference/release-notes/release-notes-2.1.3.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Release notes for MicroCloud 2.1.3, including highlights about new features, bugfixes, and other updates from the MicroCloud project.
---

(ref-release-notes-2.1.3)=
# MicroCloud 2.1.3 release notes

> This is a {ref}`LTS release <ref-releases-microcloud-lts>` and contains bugfixes, package updates and new features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an {ref}`LTS release <ref-releases-microcloud-lts>` and contains bugfixes, package updates and new features.
```

Small change: since LTS as an acronym is pronounced "EL-TEE-ESS", I believe that this should be "an LTS." It appears as "an LTS" elsewhere in the docs, too.

Author: Good spot, thanks fixed.

Instead the cluster's features are used when creating new volumes.

### LXD asynchronous endpoint changes

In the upcoming 6.8 feature release of LXD, some endpoints are changed for asynchronous use. This release of MicroCloud is updated to accommodate these changes.

(ref-release-notes-2.1.3-bugfixes)=
## Bug fixes

The following bug fixes are included in this release.

### Preseed daemon readiness

A race condition was observed in the `microcloud preseed` command that could occur when executed immediately after snap installation.
An additional daemon readiness check was added before proceeding with the actual preseed operations.

### Join token expiry extension

When a MicroCloud gets created with a large number of resources (such as many Ceph OSDs), the MicroCloud installation might take longer
than the lifetime of the underlying join tokens.
Those join tokens are created at the beginning of the MicroCloud installation and are consumed member by member by each of the components (MicroCloud, MicroCeph, MicroOVN and LXD).

By default, these tokens are created with a lifetime of five minutes, which can be too short for larger deployments or slower environments. 

> To avoid tokens expiring before they can be used, we have extended this lifetime to one hour. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid tokens expiring before they can be used, we have extended the default lifetime to one hour. 
```

Adding the word "default" to clearly signal that you have changed the default lifetime to one hour, rather than, for example, making it possible for users to optionally extend the default to one hour.

Author: Fixed.

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Release notes for MicroCloud 2.1.3, including highlights about new features, bugfixes, and other updates from the MicroCloud project.
---

(ref-release-notes-2.1.3)=
# MicroCloud 2.1.3 release notes

This is a {ref}`LTS release <ref-releases-microcloud-lts>` and contains bugfixes, package updates and new features.
It's the fourth release of the 2 LTS track.

(ref-release-notes-2.1.3-highlights)=
## Highlights

This section highlights new and improved features in this release.

### Temporary UI access link

> It's fast to deploy a MicroCloud and gain the ability to spawn resources with it from the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's fast to deploy a MicroCloud and gain the ability to spawn resources from the command line.
```

Author: Fixed in here and 3.1.

To provide the same experience when {ref}`using the UI <howto-ui>`, we added a new question to the end of the
interactive `microcloud init` questionnaire:

`Would you like to create an initial UI access link? (yes/no) [default=yes]:`

If you answer `yes` (default), MicroCloud creates a temporary UI access link that allows you to immediately enter
the LXD UI after MicroCloud is installed.

> The temporary access lasts for 24 hours and is intended to perform further setups (such as configuring permanent access).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The temporary access lasts for 24 hours and is intended to allow you to perform further setup (such as configuring permanent access).
```

Author: Fixed. I have also updated the 3.1 release notes as they include the same section.

This requires a 6+ version of LXD, which is currently a feature track (non-LTS).

### Documentation changes

> When viewing the [docs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/microcloud), the version selection now offers a `latest` which returns the documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When viewing the docs, the version selection now offers a `latest` which returns the documentation
```
Avoid using Markdown-style links to point to our own documentation. Instead, use `{ref}`. In this case though, no link is needed (I assume this is a carryover from the Discourse post formatting?).

Author: Fixed.

for the current development version 3 of MicroCloud.
The new version `default` points to the latest LTS version 2 of MicroCloud.
As soon as MicroCloud version 3 becomes the next LTS, the `default` version will be switched accordingly.

> This ensures existing links will stay intact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When viewing the [docs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/microcloud), the version selector now displays `latest` and `default` versions.
The `latest` version returns the documentation for the current development version of MicroCloud (currently MicroCloud 3), and the  `default` version points to the latest LTS version (currently MicroCloud 2).
When MicroCloud version 3 becomes the next LTS, the `default` version will be updated accordingly.
This ensures existing links will stay intact.
```

A few edits, with the goal of clarifying that `latest` always points at the development version and `default` always points at the LTS version, which only happen to be v3 and v2 at present.

Author: Fixed.

> In addition you can now see the version of the docs currently being displayed by checking the version suffix appended to the documentation site's title.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the version number is now appended to the documentation site title.
```

A few edits to simplify this statement.

Author: Thanks fixed, sounds much better this way.

### E2E test report

When running the e2e test suite, the `--report` flag can be added to generate an HTML report with test results:

`e2e/run --report`

The report gets saved to file `$(date +%Y%m%d%H%M%S)-e2e-run.html` based on the current time.

### Respect RBD features from the Ceph cluster 

If the LXD version in use supports the `storage_ceph_use_rbd_defaults` API extension, MicroCloud no longer sets the RBD features
`layering,striping,exclusive-lock,object-map,fast-diff,deep-flatten` on the created LXD `remote` Ceph RBD storage pool.
Instead the cluster's features are used when creating new volumes.

### LXD asynchronous endpoint changes

The recent changes in LXD's endpoints to become asynchronous are accommodated so that MicroCloud 2 LTS can be used with the upcoming

> LXD feature release 6.8.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the upcoming 6.8 feature release of LXD, some endpoints are changed for asynchronous use. This release of MicroCloud is updated to accommodate these changes.
```

Author: Fixed.

(ref-release-notes-2.1.3-bugfixes)=
## Bug fixes

The following bug fixes are included in this release.

### Preseed daemon readiness

A race condition was observed in the `microcloud preseed` command that could occur when executed immediately after snap installation.

> An additional daemon readiness check got added before proceeding with the actual preseed operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An additional daemon readiness check was added before proceeding with the actual preseed operations.
```

Author: Fixed.

> ### Join token expiry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Join token expiry extension
```

Author: Fixed.

In case the MicroCloud gets created with a large number of resources (e.g. many Ceph OSDs), the MicroCloud installation might take longer
than the lifetime of the underlying join tokens.

> Those join tokens are created at the beginning of the MicroCloud installation and are consumed member after member for each of the to be configured components (MicroCloud, MicroCeph, MicroOVN and LXD).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a MicroCloud gets created with a large number of resources (such as many Ceph OSDs), the MicroCloud installation might take longer
than the lifetime of the underlying join tokens.
Those join tokens are created at the beginning of the MicroCloud installation and are consumed member by member by each of the components (MicroCloud, MicroCeph, MicroOVN and LXD).
```

Avoid Latinisms, such as "e.g."

Also, a few nitpicking changes.

Author: Thanks fixed.

By default these tokens were created with a lifetime of five minutes which was observed to be too short for larger deployments.

> Instead the tokens now have a lifetime of one hour which should accommodate both slower environments and larger deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, these tokens are created with a lifetime of five minutes, which can be too short for larger deployments or slower environments. To avoid tokens expiring before they can be used, we have extended this lifetime to one hour. 
```

Author: Fixed.

## Upgrading to the new version

> See the {ref}`howto-update-microcloud` guide for information on how to retrieve and use the latest version of MicroCloud 2 LTS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are already using MicroCloud 2 LTS, refer to the {ref}`howto-update` guide for information on how to retrieve and use the latest release within the same major version.

If you are on an older major version, refer to the {ref}`howto-upgrade` guide.
```

Author: Fixed.

### Temporary UI access link

It's fast to deploy a MicroCloud and gain the ability to spawn resources with it from the command line.
To provide the same experience when {ref}`using the UI <howto-ui>`, we added a new question to the end of the
interactive `microcloud init` questionnaire:

`Would you like to create an initial UI access link? (yes/no) [default=yes]:`

If you answer `yes` (default), MicroCloud creates a temporary UI access link that allows you to immediately enter
the LXD UI after MicroCloud is installed.
The temporary access lasts for 24 hours and is intended to perform further setups (such as configuring permanent access).

This requires a 6+ version of LXD, which is currently a feature track (non-LTS).

### Documentation changes

When viewing the [docs](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/microcloud), the version selection now offers a `latest` which returns the documentation
for the current development version 3 of MicroCloud.
The new version `default` points to the latest LTS version 2 of MicroCloud.
As soon as MicroCloud version 3 becomes the next LTS, the `default` version will be switched accordingly.

> This ensures existing links will stay intact. 

Author: Fixed.

In addition you can now see the version of the docs currently being displayed by checking the version suffix appended to the documentation site's title.

### E2E test report

> When running the e2e test suite, the `--report` flag can be added to to generate a HTML report with test results:

Author: Fixed.

`e2e/run --report`

The report gets saved to file `$(date +%Y%m%d%H%M%S)-e2e-run.html` based on the current time.

> ### Respect RBD features from cluster 

Author: Fixed.

> In case the used version of LXD supports the `storage_ceph_use_rbd_defaults` API extension, MicroCloud won't anymore set the RBD features

Author: Fixed.

`layering,striping,exclusive-lock,object-map,fast-diff,deep-flatten` on the created LXD `remote` Ceph RBD storage pool.
Instead the cluster's features are used when creating new volumes.

### LXD asynchronous endpoint changes

The recent changes in LXD's endpoints to become asynchronous are accommodated so that MicroCloud 2 LTS can be used with the upcoming
LXD feature release 6.8.

(ref-release-notes-2.1.3-bugfixes)=
## Bug fixes

The following bug fixes are included in this release.

### Preseed daemon readiness

A race condition was observed in the `microcloud preseed` command that could occur when executed immediately after snap installation.
An additional daemon readiness check got added before proceeding with the actual preseed operations.

### Join token expiry

In case the MicroCloud gets created with a large number of resources (e.g. many Ceph OSDs), the MicroCloud installation might take longer
than the lifetime of the underlying join tokens.
Those join tokens are created at the beginning of the MicroCloud installation and are consumed member after member for each of the to be 

> configured components (MicroCloud, MicroCeph, MicroOVN and LXD).

Author: Fixed.
